= moneydance-ruby

url: http://arvicco.github.com/moneydance-ruby

== DESCRIPTION

This is a Moneydance[http://moneydance.com] extension that adds Ruby scripting support to it.

Moneydance[http://moneydance.com] is a full-featured personal financial management
application featuring online banking, online bill payment, investment management, budget
tracking, scheduled transactions, check printing, detailed reports/graphs and more.

It is cross-platform (Java) and offers best programming API for extension among
similar applications. However, previously this API only supported Java and Python.

Moneydance Ruby extends Moneydance by adding efficient Ruby scripting support to it.

== INSTALL EXTENSION

You should have Moneydance 2010 installed. Download {Ruby Extension}[http://github.com/downloads/arvicco/moneydance-ruby/ruby.mxt],
save it as a file "ruby.mxt" on your computer. You can then install this file into
Moneydance via Menu:Extensions->Add->From file [Next>] Choose ruby.ext file.
Ignore the warning that you're loading unsigned extension.

Detailed instructions and downloads are here[http://arvicco.github.com/moneydance-ruby].

== INSTALL FROM SOURCE

You should have Moneydance 2010, Java 1.6 and JRuby 1.5.6+ installed and functional.
JRuby should be your active Ruby.

  $ git clone git://github.com/arvicco/moneydance-ruby.git
  $ cd moneydance-ruby
  $ rake ant:jar

This produces ruby.ext in dist subdirectory. You can then install this file into
Moneydance via Menu:Extensions->Add->From file [Next>] Choose ruby.ext file.
Ignore the warning that you're loading unsigned extension.

== USAGE

Installed extension adds "Ruby interface" item to Extensions menu. This item opens
IRB console that you can use to run arbitrary code against live Moneydance and its
data files. You can also load/run Ruby script files inside Moneydance environment,
both from GUI and from command line. More info on extension
homepage[http://arvicco.github.com/moneydance-ruby].

In future, I plan to add a nice ORM wrapper around Moneydance data file (probably ActiveModel).

== RESOURCES

* Homepage[http://arvicco.github.com/moneydance-ruby]
* Moneydance[http://moneydance.com/]
* {Moneydance API}[http://moneydance.com/dev/ext_api_docs/index.html]
* {Moneydance URI Scheme}[http://moneydance.com/dev/urischeme]
* {Moneydance Ruby Primer}[http://arvicco.github.com/moneydance-ruby/2011/01/10/Work-with-Moneydance-API.html]

== LICENSE

Copyright (c) 2010 Arvicco. Free and unrestricted. See LICENSE for details.