---
layout: post
title: Use Moneydance Ruby
---
## After installation

Once Moneydance Ruby extension is installed, it adds "Ruby Interface" item to Moneydance
Extension menu. Clicking on this item starts Ruby Console that you can use to run Ruby
code against live Moneydance framework and data collections.

You can run Ruby scripts via two mechanisms, through Ruby console or from the command line.

## Using Ruby console

Ruby Console (IRB, Interactive Ruby) is great for testing your ideas and running
one-liners, as well as generally learning your way around Moneydance classes and methods.
You can load/execute Ruby source files from console too, using "Load file" button at the
bottom. Any output or errors generated by loaded code is fed into the console, and you can
continue your IRB session normally once the code is loaded.

## Running Ruby scripts from command line

Once you have created (or downloaded) some Ruby scripts, you can run them inside
Moneydance environment via special command line mode that this program supports.

You can also run your Ruby scripts via command like this (Unix):

    $ moneydance moneydance:fmodule:ruby:file?/path/to/script.rb

On OSX (assuming you installed Moneydance into /Applications), use:

    $ /Applications/Moneydance.app/Contents/MacOS/JavaApplicationStub \
      -invoke_and_quit moneydance:fmodule:ruby:file?/path/to/script.rb

That's a mouthful, so you may want to create an alias in your profile.

## Moneydance Ruby is JRuby

Moneydance Ruby is [JRuby](http://www.jruby.org) and its interactive console is
derived from Jirb_swing.

## Working with Moneydance from Ruby

[Moneydance Ruby Primer](/moneydance-ruby/2011/01/10/Work-with-Moneydance-API.html)
highlights some of the useful methods and approaches to programmatically accessing Moneydance.
Possibilities are limitless, this is Ruby - play with data models interactively, read
[API reference docs](http://moneydance.com/dev/apidoc/index.html) and hack away.


